good afternoon I'd like to update you on
our response to Co vid 19 I'm joined
today by dr. Jenny Harris the deputy
chief medical officer as of 9:00 a.m.
today a hundred and twenty seven
thousand seven hundred and thirty seven
people have now been tested for the
virus a hundred and eight thousand two
hundred and fifteen have tested negative
nineteen thousand five hundred and
twenty two have tested positive of those
who have contracted the virus 1228 have
sadly died
the virus is indiscriminate it doesn't
matter who you are where you are or how
old you are we each have a part to play
by staying at home protecting the NHS
and helping to save lives we all have a
duty to one another to keep everyone
safe so today I'd like to give you two
updates before answering questions the
first is on the plans that I have put in
place to ensure that every corner of the
country can confront the corona virus
epidemic the second on what the
government is doing to shield the most
vulnerable people in society now on the
first question I've put in place in all
parts of the country procedures to
ensure that everywhere can be ready to
move forward together all parts of the
country are now on an emergency footing
this is an unprecedented step in
peacetime we haven't done anything like
this since the Second World War this
means that we're establishing strategic
coordination centers across the whole
country
each Center is led by gold commanders
we're bringing together senior members
of the emergency services the police the
fire service the ambulance service with
local authorities and the NHS to lead
communities through this challenging
period from Cornwall to Cumbria we've
embedded within each of these groups
members of the Armed Forces including
some of the finest military planners in
the world these groups are planning the
local response to the virus using their
expertise their judgment and their
leadership to ensure a comprehensive a
coordinated and a consistent response
across the country now one issue that
they have been helping us to coordinate
and about which I know there is a lot of
concern is the provision of personal
protection equipment we simply cannot
and should not ask people to be on the
frontline without the right protective
equipment we have a clear plan to ensure
that those serving this country at this
time have the right equipment we've
established the National supply
distribution response team and they're
supported now by members of the Armed
Forces and other emergency services who
are working around the clock to deliver
the equipment to the people who need it
most a hundred and seventy million masks
forty two point eight million gloves
thirteen point seven million aprons a
hundred and eighty-two thousand gowns
almost ten million items of cleaning
equipment and 2.3 million pairs of eye
protectors all delivered to 58,000 NHS
trusts and healthcare
things including GP surgeries pharmacist
and community providers every single GP
practice dental practice and community
pharmacy has had ap PE delivery all care
homes hospices and home care providers
have or will shortly receive a delivery
to NHS and social care workers all those
who rely on this equipment and to their
families and loved ones watching this
afternoon we understand and we will not
stop until we have got you the equipment
that you need now last weekend at this
press conference the Prime Minister and
I explained why 1.5 million people who
are extremely vulnerable vulnerable to
the virus due to their underlying health
conditions needed to stay at home for a
period of 12 weeks and avoid
face-to-face contact since then the NHS
have written to almost a million of
these people and outlined the steps that
they need to take to protect themselves
we've also established a dedicated
webpage on Gulf dot uk' which those in
receipt of the letter should go to to
let us know whether or not they need
further assistance over the course of
the next 12 weeks there's also a new
phone number which is on the letter they
have or will receive shortly now if this
applies to you I know that you will find
this a very worrying time you'll be
thinking about how you can continue to
access the medicine that you need how
you can get the food and other essential
supplies that you rely on if you don't
have family or friends or neighbors
nearby who you can rely on then the NHS
will deliver your medicines through the
community pharmacy network and if you
register on
mine or using the phone service that
we've set up letting us know that you
need support then we will deliver food
and supplies to your doorstep and this
weekend
I saw for myself first hand the first
deliveries being made the packages
included cereal fruit tinned goods tea
bags biscuits toiletries and other
essentials the first 50,000 will have
been sent out by the end of this week
and we're ramping up production to send
out as many as are required for as long
as it takes if this applies to you while
you will now have to be at home for a
prolonged period of time and that will
be difficult I want you to know that you
are not alone we're here to support you
for as long as you need us we've all
been hugely impressed by the commitment
and the dedication of those working in
social care in local councils delivering
essential public services like ensuring
that the bins continue to get collected
none more so than me as the secretary of
state for local government we all
respect the 12,000 heroic former doctors
and nurses and paramedics who have come
back to work and being deployed this
weekend and I think we've all been moved
by the number of people who signed up to
be one of the NHS voluntary responders
today we can announce an extraordinary
three-quarters of a million people have
signed up to do that in every city in
every town in every village there's
going to be work to be done and in each
of us there is the power to do it and so
please take part please play your part
please consider your friends your family
your neighbors when you're shopping
please
all the elderly and support them when
this is done and it will be done we all
want to be proud of the part that we've
played together thank you very much and
now I will answer some questions from
the media and I think first question
today is from Simon Israel from Channel
4 News
good afternoon Simon good afternoon
Minister I have two questions one for
you or one for dr. Paris my question to
you is ten days ago mr. predicted the
tide would be turned in 12 weeks what's
the current forecast and - dr. Paris I
want to ask a message sent to staff
today at Kings Hospital trust said and I
quote a number of deaths being reported
at Kings in national figures is below
what they are experiencing this is not
just Kings
there are a number of other trusts and
the center has been made aware ah at
what point are we being given accurate
up-to-date figures on the numbers who
have died well thank you Simon if I can
begin for handing over to Jenny
nobody's pretending that this will be
over in a few weeks but what the prime
minister said in the past and I will
reiterate today is that if we all play
our part if we all follow the very clear
medical advice then we can turn the tide
of this virus and at the heart of that
is a very simple message which is to
stay at home by doing so protect the NHS
and then save lives if we follow that
advice then we can turn the tide and the
more we adhere to that advice the more
lives will be saved and the faster will
begin to do that Jenny thank you so just
picking up the point about the tide and
the turning I think this is an important
message to get across to the public as I
said previously on a number of these
interviews this is a bit of a moving
feast which
is dependent on the actions that we take
as individuals and collectively as a
population if we practice social
distancing effectively we will move the
peak across and that is a good thing
because as we move it it will drop so we
need to keep practicing the data that we
have the modeling going forward will
suggest that in in the time period which
the mayor
sorry the Prime Minister noted which was
12 weeks we would get on top of the
virus and that is exactly what I hope we
will do the proof of that will come in
around two to three weeks and that is
because our most constant figures and
we'll come back to this in a moment are
the deaths and the deaths follow the
numbers of infections and where it's
usually a two or three week time lag and
we also need a lag for the effectiveness
of the intervention measures to come
through so what I keep saying frequently
and I'm sorry if I'm repetitive is that
we need to wait for two to three weeks
to see what we have achieved
collectively and then the slope of that
curve will start to indicate where a new
peak will be but we're optimistic that
that peak will be lower so we need to
keep looking at this but it will be two
to three weeks before we are clear
whether the peak has shifted across or
not
so I think that was the the first
question the second one that you raised
was around deaths clearly every deaths
that we have is a really sad event it
involves a family and a lot of sadness
we have to make sure that when we're
reporting the family is content and
knows and that all our data is
absolutely accurate for any event like
this whether it be Co vid whether it was
Ebola whatever it is there is always a
time lag for us to check and evaluate
that the data across the system is
linked we do not want to be miss
reporting data and then having to
correct it the public would not have
confidence if we were doing that and as
we have had sadly to register more
deaths that time period takes longer so
I'm not aware of the communication for
all
from Kings it may be that that's gone
back into the the NHS but what I can say
is all of our data links up and there is
a time lag and for the reporting
yesterday it will have been the deaths
reported the previous day so it is
inevitable that there will be a time lag
this is not an issue of transparency
it's an issue of ensuring that all those
family that need to know and all the
parts of the system can consolidate the
information and ensure it's accurate for
the public Thank You Jenny yes that's
very clear I'll take the next question
from Paul brand from ITV Paul yeah thank
you firstly to the deputy chief medical
officer originally we were told that the
lockdown measures would be for three
weeks this is it safe to now assume that
they will go on for much longer than
that and the Secretary of State when
will the government be making that
reassessment so that people can plan
their lives
I think shall I start with that one so I
think if you look about what the prime
minister said was he would review in
three weeks and that actually links back
to the point that I've just made it
would be foolish of us to start
something one day and assume that it was
going to have an impact the next for all
of us it's taken quite some time to get
used to this new way of living to ensure
that we practice social distancing and
we stick to that and as a population we
have evidence that we're getting better
at that as we go through people are
staying at home or as they should
they're using transport less they're
only going to work when it's essential
so those measures have now been in place
solidly for a week or two we need
another couple of weeks to see that
through and as I've just mentioned
earlier the the issue of the three weeks
is for us to review where we are and see
if we've had an impact jointly on the
slope of that curve but I think to make
it clear to the public if we are
successful we will have squashed the top
of that curve which is brilliant
but we must not then suddenly revert to
our normal way of living that would be
quite dangerous if we stopped then all
of our efforts will be wasted and we
could potentially see a second peak so
over time probably over the next six
months we will have a three week review
we
we'll see where we're going we need to
keep that lid on and then gradually we
will be able to hopefully adjust some of
the social distancing measures and
gradually get us all back to normal so I
think three weeks for review two or
three months to see whether we've really
squashed it but about three to six
months ideally and lots of uncertainty
in that but then to see at which point
we can actually get back to normal and
it is plausible that it could go further
than that we just need to wait to see
how successful we've been and of course
the bottom line is as we always say keep
practicing good social distancing
because we will manage it quicker and
better between us
well absolutely from the outset of this
crisis we drew up the measures that
could be implemented and then on expert
medical advice we have chosen the right
time for this country to implement them
and we've taken a number of very
significant steps on social distancing
over the course of the last 10 days as
jenny has just said and it is the nature
of this virus that it takes a couple of
weeks to see how effective each one of
those in turn has been when we've
implemented them we've said that we will
review these in three weeks or so and
when the prime minister made his
announcement on Monday bringing to a
close
non-essential shops and encouraging us
all to stay at home to restrict what we
do in our leisure time he made clear
that we would review these steps at
Easter on the basis of the expert
medical opinion and that's exactly what
we intend to do but the evidence that I
have seen suggests as jenny has said
that the public are generally complying
I've spoken to a number of chief
constables from across the country over
the course of the last few days and
business owners are behaving very
responsibly of course there are always
small numbers of people who aren't but
in general the public is doing the right
thing the more we comply the more we
will be able to protect the NHS to save
people's lives and the faster will turn
the tide on the virus if I can take the
next question from David
shuckman
who's from the BBC David good afternoon
thank you very much indeed it had two
questions if I may first mr. generic to
you the Prime Minister in his letter
talks about leveling with the public
about things getting worse before they
get better what do you think the coming
week is going to look like and then a
question for dr. Harris we've had
confirmation of the very sad death of an
ENT surgeon am Gerdau Hourani what do
you think that says what message does
that send to NHS staff on the frontline
well thank you very much David and can I
also give my deepest sympathies to the
family of doctor al Hani I we heard the
news just a few moments ago that he'd
very sadly passed away with respect to
your question the Prime Minister has now
written or will be over the course of
this week to all the households in this
country setting out very clearly the
task that is before all of us we see on
the news the difficult scenes in other
European countries like Italy for
example and the deaths that we are
reporting daily and these preface press
conferences are very sobering every
death is a tragedy we don't want to see
any unnecessary death and so what the
Prime Minister has said to all of us in
that letter is that we all have the
power to influence the course of events
with respect to this virus if we want to
protect people's lives if we want to
help the NHS to be able to have the
capacity to continue to perform the good
quality public service that we all want
it to do throughout the course of the
virus then we need to take heed of the
medical advice we do need to stay at
home well by doing that will protect the
NHS and will help to save people's lives
so this is on all of us we all have a
responsibility to protect each other we
just need to follow the advice in the
days and weeks ahead Jenny okay and well
clearly you will not expect me as a
medical professional to comment on an
individual case that would be normal
practice but equally as a medical
professional of course I'm very saddened
by the fact that one of our professional
colleagues has passed away it clearly is
a worrying event it's worrying for the
nation because it's another death in our
statistics it's a it's another loss to a
family and it will be a loss to an NHS
family as well I think for NHS staff on
the frontline and our caring staff it's
not just in our health services it's all
people who are battling against this
virus they will inevitably be concerned
and some of the work that we're doing
around communications and around
personal protective equipment is to just
try and ensure there is a common
understanding between us of the support
that is there for them it is in no one's
interests that we lose our colleagues on
the front line and we really really want
to support them so the only thing I
would say is though clearly in a in a
disease like this which is affecting
everybody we just need to remember that
it's not just the NHS or just a family
we we're finding this right across the
population it will affect all of us it
will upset undoubtedly our colleagues in
the NHS excuse me but we shouldn't we
shouldn't take that as any signal
specific to the NHS we do have some new
guidance coming out for colleagues in
the NHS shortly and I'm hoping that will
help to support them in their work on
the frontline Thank You Jenny and the
guidance it's going to be published
shortly will also apply to those working
in other essential public services for
example in social care in local
government and other settings so that
they can have the best possible advice
as to the type of PPE that they need to
continue to do their role safely in the
days ahead
but the next question I think is from
Sam Lister from the express Sam thank
you I'm if I could ask dr. Harry's first
I just want to be really clear about
what you've said are you saying that
come Judgment Day in two or three weeks
time if you've not seen the necessary
changes that you require the country
really
Italy is facing lockdown for six months
and if I could ask the Secretary of
State we've seen a number of police
forces over the weekend set up hotlines
where people can report concerns about
neighbors or other people they believe
have floated the rules would you
encourage people to raise their concerns
with these hotlines
sure I'll start with that one so I think
just to be clear on what I have actually
said I don't think I have said we will
be in lockdown for six months just to be
clear I also haven't said we'll
definitely be in the best place possible
in two or three weeks the important
thing is this is a moving target if we
do well it moves forward and comes down
and we manage all our care through our
care health and care systems sensibly in
a controlled way and that's what we're
aiming for the the issue about the two
to three weeks is there is a time lag
between somebody when somebody gets the
disease and become symptomatic and
potentially transmits it and then very
sadly for those people who become ill
they will be usually are ill for for a
period of time and then deteriorate in
their health status and sadly some of
them will end up dying and there are
time periods for that so one for how
well we do our intervention if we all
stop shopping on Monday we would not
expect any of this data to change on
Tuesday we would expect to start seeing
a footfall dropping over the first week
we would start to see new infections
dropping over the next week and we would
start to see deaths dropping over the
following week so the implication there
is and the prime minister's letter is we
actually anticipate that our numbers
will get worse over the next week
possibly two and then we are looking to
see whether we have managed to push that
curve down and we start to see a decline
the issue about the time frame is really
important so this is not to say we would
be in complete lockdown for six months
but it means that as a nation we have to
be really really responsible and keep
doing what we're all doing until we're
sure that we can gradually start lifting
various into
actions which are likely to be spaced
based on the science and our data until
we gradually come back to a normal
normal way of living and that may mean
that we have a few bumps on the way
rather than the nice curves that you've
seen in graphs in the in the media or on
our charts it's really important that we
all do that together we will not have
succeeded until we get right to the end
of this outbreak and we understand how
the disease transmits as we get more
information in due course about the
pattern of transmission then we will
have more insight into how to manage
that tail end of it and we can provide
more information then thanks Jenny
well as I said earlier the measures that
we've taken which are very restrictive
and not things that we've taken lightly
the evidence that we've seen so far
suggests a high degree of compliance
from members of the public the scenes
that we saw last weekend have by and
large not been replicated this weekend
police forces have reported very few
instances of non-essential retailers
remaining open against the rules and so
you know I think it's very encouraging
that people are increasingly taking this
seriously and playing their part in
helping us to protect the NHS and save
lives as a result police forces have
powers they are able to enforce these
measures they can find individuals and
those fines can ratchet up for the very
small number of people in society who
repeatedly refused to follow the
measures and take the advice of the
police and that's absolutely right but
we want to do this by consent we want to
do this with us all coming together in a
national effort and there's a moral
obligation on all of us to play our part
protect ourselves but also protect
others and that's a regardless of your
age and there are many young people who
feel that they are invincible that isn't
correct the virus affects all of us but
each of us has the ability to protect
others and so I really urge once again
everybody to pay heed to adhere to the
strong medical advice that we've all
received to stay at home and where you
do go out do it in the manner that we
have advised respecting social
distancing advice and when you can't
work from home try to work from home but
when you can't do so then go to work and
at work
follow Public Health England's guidance
whilst you're there as well so that
together we can protect the country and
begin to turn the tide now I'll come now
to the last question which is from Jack
blonde chard from Politico Jack good
afternoon thanks very much I have a
question for each of you please
Deb's chief medical officer and we've
seen very alarmingly large increases in
the number of deaths over the last year
on each of the last two or three days is
that as you had expected or are the
number of deaths increasing more quickly
than you at home in Secretary of State's
have you muddled more extreme social
distancing measures shouldn't they be
necessary and give you an can you give
us an indication of where things might
go if what we're doing so far doesn't
prove to be enough and so thank you for
that Jack and sadly the answer is yes it
is as expected in many ways it's it's
not an easy position to stand on a
platform and say we expect a large
number of people to die but we have a
pandemic on our hands and it is an
unprecedented event for this generation
in this country I think it is because of
where we are on the curve all all their
birth as I've said previously applies we
are expecting that that number will
increase for the next week or two but
then we anticipate that if we keep doing
what we're doing and I can't emphasize
that we have to keep doing it is no good
just doing it for a few days and
stopping that we do anticipate that
those numbers will start to drop the
important thing about the number of
deaths and it is a very sadly and easy
to count a statistic in if you like and
it's quite difficult to translate what
it means often to the public in
of death rates and there has been a huge
amount of media written and reported on
that but it is a sort of stable
statistic but it lags behind impressions
on the rate of increase of infections so
we just need to watch it carefully hold
tight for a week or two keep doing what
we're doing and then come back and ask
me the question again and I think
hopefully we'll be on the way down a
little bit that's right
well I think as Jenny said the task for
us all now as a country is to adhere to
the social distancing measures that
we've already announced these are very
significant moves you know unprecedented
in our peacetime history if we all
follow those measures then there's every
reason to believe that we can turn the
tide on the virus and we'll be able to
protect the NHS and to save people's
lives
of course if those measures prove
insufficient or if members of the public
are not complying with them then we will
have to consider what further options
are available to us but that is not our
intention we hope and believe that these
measures can be sufficient but it will
take because of the nature of the virus
a couple of weeks as Jenny's articulated
before we can see whether that's truly
happening and and if I could just add to
that just for reassurance because
obviously we've talked a lot about the
capacity of the NHS to manage the number
of people flowing through we have plenty
of capacity in the NHS right now to
manage people coming through the system
so those deaths represent very sadly
individuals who have not been able to
respond to the high-quality care that
the NHS has provided very good well I
think there's sorry there's one further
question from Channel five I think the
further question is room and kickboxer
from the Guardian oh sorry I do
apologize Kate okay afternoon and you
have seen the reports of Brits stranded
abroad who really really want to get
back to the UK and what can you tell us
about the size and the scale of the
repatriation package that you're going
to put together
put aside fifty million euros will
Britain be putting together something on
on a similar scale and will you be using
the RAF to bring people home and if I
may
Michael Gove this morning said that the
UK hadn't got all the information that
it needed from China to make some
decisions earlier on in the corona virus
outbreak do you know what information
was missing from decision making well
thank you UK well firstly with respect
to British citizens overseas we have and
take seriously our responsibility to
protect our nationals wherever they are
in the world that's a top priority for
the government and the foreign secretary
has been working extremely hard with
British missions all over the world to
try to bring those citizens back to the
UK and he spent this weekend speaking
with his counterparts in a range of
countries where there are citizens who
we want to get back safely to the UK as
soon as possible we've advised British
citizens abroad to come back to the UK
whilst there are still commercial
flights available that isn't the case in
all countries but it is in many we
haven't ruled out to repatriate ssin
flights and we are doing those in some
cases there is a flight ongoing at the
moment for example to Peru to bring back
a group of British citizens who've been
in a difficult situation there if we
need to do more step of that kind in the
days ahead then we will of course do so
we want to get those British citizens
back safely to the UK with respect to
the International picture more generally
while the UK is leading the
international efforts this is a global
pandemic and we want to play our part to
the full the Prime Minister has been
speaking to his counterparts from the g7
and the g20 we are now the world's
leading country in offering funding to
support vaccine research almost 500
million pounds we've offered and we will
put more at the disposal of that very
important mission if that's required and
there may be more steps that we can do
as an international community in the
future we want to be absolutely at the
heart of that of course there will be
lessons to be learnt in the future
about how we and other countries have
responded to this virus but the UK our
government at the moment is focused 100%
on trying to save lives here and that
means putting in place the measures that
we've discussed today it means
supporting the NHS and Social Care
shielding those vulnerable individuals
for whom we've been providing food
parcels beginning this weekend and above
all for people listening this evening to
this broadcast it means each and every
one of us in our own lives following the
advice from Jenny and her colleagues
stay at home protect the NHS and that is
the way that we can all save lives and
begin to turn the tide on the virus so
thank you Jenny for joining us this
evening and thank you very much indeed
everybody for watching at home
[Music]
you